========================================
Co-Flow, A Fluid Model For Collaboration
========================================

An initial thesis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:X-Created: [2009-03-25, 17:55]
:X-Type:    Page


**Co-flow: A Fluid Model For Collaboration**. A new way of being has emerged for
me over the past 2 years and is based on the work I have been doing all my life.

This is not a comprehensive description. It is a scratch board for me to compose
my ideas about it. I intend to keep it updated and to add to it as my ideas
develop. Of course I will love to do this with others, as has been the way so
far.

Here is how **Co-Flow -- A Fluid Model For Collaboration** -- emerged:


* `Evolution Lounge and Pioneers of Change`_ It began with my my experiences in
  self-organisation at a group level with `Pioneers Of Change
  <http://www.pioneersofchange.net>`_, 2002 to 2007 and my coaching work that
  happened in parallel. In Poc we experimented explicitly with
  Self-Organisation - the structure of Pioneers of Change itself is chaordic. I
  became aware of the difficulties involved in self-organisaton and I learnt a
  lot from these experiments in which I also integrated my coaching practices.
  It led me to launch `Evolution Lounge
  <the-story-behind-evolution-lounge.html>`_ : the collective as
  Coach/Facilitator.

* `Michel Bauwens and P2P`_ Something clicked into place in my brain in early
  2006 when i first encountered Michel Bauwen's seminal p2p essay. It addressed
  the sea changes afoot in society at the level of governance, ownership and
  production. I understood *cognitively* what I was feeling *intuitively* about
  the world, what I had been experiencing with pioneers of change and what was
  alive in Evolution Lounge. ("The collective as coach") Michel Bauwens work
  went further in describing a model by which self-organisation can be nurtured;
  highlighting the minimal principles.
 
* `Removing Abstract Layers: Direct Perception and Byron Katie`_ Another aspect
  of Co-Flow emerged as a result of stumbling on The Work of Byron Katie in 2005
  and then attending her School in April 2007. I realised the importance of
  Direct Perception and the consequence of that as a practice at a group level.
  Co-flow did not have a name them but I knew that direct perception needed to
  be integrated somehow. Byron Katie also enabled me to understand the benefit
  of fuzzy logic as applied to individual minds. I saw how The Work is a
  technique to go beyond one's own blind spots and how the principles behind it
  could be applied to groups. I was playing with this already in Evolution
  Lounge but it was not yet clear to me how this could scale up in society.

* `Flocking, Confluence and David Pinto`_ The Co-Flow model crystallised further
  for me in August 2007 when the 'Confluence Model' was articulated by `David
  Pinto <http://twitter.com/happyseaurchin>`_. Confluence outlines the simple
  human behaviours needed to exhibit flocking. It encourages direct perception
  at a group level and yet *depends* on direct perception at an individual
  level. It is fundamentally about self-organisation, minimal and was incredibly
  helpful in explaining why groups fail to collaborate. David has written his
  ideas in his book called `Pulse
  <http://www.lulu.com/content/paperback-book/pulse/4602415>`_ and our work on
  Confluence in Sep-Dec 2007 helped to outline a technology platform that could
  encourage flocking behaviour.

* `Decisioning: A Fluid Model for Decision Making`_ I went on to think about
  decision making as an continuous activity rather than an artificially-isolated
  event. The missing link in this puzzle was the integrating of group and
  individual awareness. I realised that this is what I had been working for a
  long time. Most organisations artificially separate these two aspects. Key to
  Co-Flow is the edges between the two -- group awareness and individual
  awareness -- and this helped me to better understand decisions in groups, and
  the notion of **decisioning** as opposed to 'decision-making' emerged. I
  specified a mechanism by which decisioning could be encouraged
  technologically. (see videos below)

* `Signalling Changing Energetic State to Each Other Using K`_ I described the
  dynamic by which decisioning happens; as a signalling of changing energetic
  states. I introduced the notion of k -- a measure of individual energetic
  state, and K -- a measure of the energetic state of a group. This was finally
  a way to couple group awareness/individual awareness to behaviour: K enables
  the feedback loops between the individual and group behaviour to be more
  visible. This comes to life in Evolution lounge Lounge and in the applied
  U-Process workshop. In my work as a career coach and community builder these
  principles drive the sculpting and integrating of individual and group purpose
  over the last 5 years. It all came together and K is a simple link between the
  two.

**Co-flow** is essentially a fluid metaphor for our life. And can be applied to
collaboration. It is not yet 'complete'!
  
Incidentally it helps to understand `Twitter <http://www.twitter.com>`_ -- the
micro messaging system. I believe Twitter is part of the transition away from a
mechanistic interpretation of life and towards a fluid one.


.. raw:: html

  <br />

Evolution Lounge and Pioneers of Change
---------------------------------------

During 2002-2007 in `Pioneers of Change <http://www.pioneersofchange.net>`_ we
experimented with applying living systems theories to organisations. Pioneers of
Change itself was designed as a chaordic organisation. (Chaordic imples that the
activity is focused in the realm between chaos and order - where life is at its most
creative)

The governing council was self-selecting group of around 30 or so people with no
explicit leaders. There was a partially funded executive group (called The
Cultivation Team) that was there to serve the whole network. We learnt about
nurturing self-organisation and encountered the tension between the need for
consensus and the need for individual freedom to act and to be able to move
things forward.

We organised events using the chaordic model. The experiences were rich, diverse
and reflected a true learning community.

One of the highlights for me was when a conflict flared up in a group of 50 of
us - all facilitators of different kinds. It was uncomfortable at the time but
for years afterwards we were absorbing the learning from that experience.

.. class:: sidebox

  In Evolution Lounge the direct perception and signalling of energetic states
  during the exercise means that the group is tuned in to itself and can more
  accurately pinpoint where and how to intervene in each person's case.

I found that capacity-building individuals was a key part of effective
self-organisation. If people are not autonomous agents, then this leads to a
very weak group where leadership is only associated with a few individuals. Whereas
when a group is composed of people who are autonomous in their thinking and
behaviour, there will be higher levels of distributed leadership. The challenge
then becomes the ability for the group to still work in some way as a whole.

`Evolution Lounge <the-story-behind-evolution-lounge.html>`_ operates with small
groups. It enables the group and the individual awareness to be integrated. It
encourages the wisdom to emerge from anywhere - in the group and in any form -
tapping into movement, chaos and physical context.

The core of Evolution Lounge - the collective presencing part is a practice in direct
perception, and signalling. Hence it leads to a state of collective presence --
an ideal pre-condition for flocking. The beauty of this collective presencing
experience is that the collective can now realistically be coach-facilitator.
Direct perception and signalling of energetic states during the exercise means
that the group is tuned in to itself and can more accurately pinpoint where and
how to intervene in each person's case.


Michel Bauwens and P2P
----------------------

`Michel Bauwens <http://p2pfoundation.net>`_ is a modern-day philosopher who has
articulated the change that has been a foot since the explosion of the internet
and related technologies.

I read his `foundational essay
<http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2ptheory1>`_ in 2006. I think
that my brain literally leapt in consciousness as I read it.

it helped to show how self-organisation needs the right kind of governance - and
his model articulates p2p Governance, ownership and production. In p2p governance, *maximising options
available* is the aim. It is anti-credentialist: anyone can put forward an
option. In contrast to the a priori selection of options, in p2p options are
selected a posteriori. Their validation is communal. I.e. acceptance happens
after the fact or execution. Also, in contrast to panoptism, we have holoptism:
where everything is visible to everyone. It is not possible for me to summarise
it properly in two paragraphs and I recommend reading the `foundational essay
<http://integralvisioning.org/article.php?story=p2ptheory1>`_. There is a wiki
dedicated to sharing knowledge on p2p. The topic is huge, well re-searched and an
asset to our society. I thank Michel Bauwens on his work in this realm.

The open-source models of software production have helped me to understand some
of the dynamics that occurred within Pioneers of Change from 2006 onwards. To
start with we had an open-source model of knoweldge sharing around process
design. The need further down the line to finance the activity of the executive
group led to the creation of a sub group of Associates which operated with
different principles to the network. Tensions arose between the sub group and
larger group and the nature of the network as a whole underwent a strong shift.
I asked Michel Bauwens to comment on my experience and based on my rough
articulation of the situation he indicated the social contract between the sub
group and the main group seemed not to have been successfully structured. The
larger group must perceive the benefits of the existence of the commercial group
as worthwhile enough for its activities to be commercialised. The preception of
what is being received must outweight what is being given. This is a
conversation which is very important and which did not happen.

.. raw:: html

  <br />

Removing Abstract Layers: Direct Perception and Byron Katie
-----------------------------------------------------------

An aspect of this model of collaboration is direct perception. It is
commonly understood that we tend to filter what we see. But what we also do is
add interpretation.

Interpretation can be useful but it can skews the simplicity of what we are
looking at. This is the root of self-deception.

Imagine that we are looking at everything through a lens. If the lens is dirty
then we are not seeing things as they are. If we do not know that there is dirt
on the lens then we may appear slightly deluded to others. Unless they too have
the same kind of dirt on their lens!

Most human beings do not perceive things directly. It takes a very clear mind to
do so. The mind can be trained however, and this is what buddhists do.

The Work of Byron Katie is a another tool for doing this. Stress comes from attachments
to thoughts that are stressful. Ultimately all stressful thoughts can be questioned. Once
this is realised, it is difficult to consciously hold onto any stressful thought. It is
harder to let go of subconscious thoughts but once we identify the stories that
we are in, we can pick out the underlying beliefs and work them. 

There is the also the possibility that something is true and not true at the
same time. Once we question our thoughts we can go beyond the mind and therefore
beyond duality. See the video below for one woman's story of this. This fuzzy
logic at an individual level enables people to go beyond hard positions and stay
very open to a variety of perspectives.

.. raw:: html

  <br />
  <object width="425" height="344"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/UyyjU8fzEYU&hl=en&fs=1&rel=0"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/UyyjU8fzEYU&hl=en&fs=1&rel=0" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true" width="425" height="344"></embed></object>
  <br />

**So how does this translate to the collective?**

`Byron Katie's model <http://thework.com>`_ helps people to remove the extra
layer of abstraction. It enables people to clean their lens of perception. When
you are working with a bunch of people who are ALL doing this very skillfully it
is an incredible experience. The usual issues with groups that so quickly
descend into deep rifts arising out of trivial issues is experienced to a lesser
degree.

For example, If I as an individual do not take gossip to be true, if I question
its truth and I only speak what I know to be true for me, then I will not be
adding to the issues of the group -- they will stop with me. If I deal with my
judgements of people as soon as they are problematic for me, then I avoid
draining the group with the issues that may arise as a result of my judgements.
We can refrain from colluding with perceptions that are stressful for people.

The collective also has a lens of perception. There are issues that are
conscious to the group and issues that are not conscious to the group. When the
wisdom of each person is integrated into the whole, you could say that the group
is fully conscious and the lens of perception is clean. In a practice called
Deep Democracy, the practice of integrating individual wisdom into a group
leaves a group to be more fully conscious.

Resistance to reality, judgement of other people and scapgoating of individuals
are all destructive practices, the impact of which the groups remain less
conscious. Direct perception is an antidote.

I belive that `The Work of Byron Katie <http://www.thework.com>`_ can be applied
at a collective level. Just as one can identify the various stories that run
through an organisation, one can identify the 'stressful thoughts' of an
organisation. These are the assumptions underneath the stories. For example, 
"our organisation is about to collapse", or "it is not safe to say what you
think in this organisation" or "people working here are lazy". These thoughts could then be 'worked' as a group. 

The point is not to deny reality. The point is to be very accurate about what is
actually true and then to act from a point of power. 

To conclude: if individuals clean their lens of perception, then the lens of the
collective will also be cleaner. The collective lens can also be cleaned by
working the underlying beliefs of the organisational stories.Perceiving things
directly is helpful for sane interchanges and The Work is a tool that helps
people to do this.

 
.. raw:: html

  <br />

Flocking, Confluence and David Pinto
------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

  <object width="640" height="505"><param name="movie"value="http://www.youtube.com/v/oCXC3cvRk20&hl=en&fs=1"></param><param
  name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess"
  value="always"></param><embed
  src="http://www.youtube.com/v/oCXC3cvRk20&hl=en&fs=1"
  type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always"
  allowfullscreen="true" width="640" height="505"></embed></object>

I created this video in December 2007 after I caught a flock of birds in the
corner of my eye - their flight was so beautiful. I watched them for a good 6
minutes, filming them and wondering if I could anticipate their movement. It was
entrancing.

I then realised that it was the perfect model to explain the idea of Confluence,
a model of collaboration that David Pinto articulated and on which we worked
extensively Sep-Nov '07 to specify the underlyings of a technological confluence
platform. Aspects of this then got integrated into `Bootstrap
<http://tav.espians.com/espra-bootstrap.html>`_ and the models of tav's Espra
since bootstrap. However, David wrote up his ideas and can be read in his book
`Pulse <http://www.lulu.com/content/paperback-book/pulse/4602415>`_

The confluence model has three sections:

* intentions/projections
* coupling
* conditions. 

The first is about sharing the daily intentions with other people that one is
working with. The subtlety is that it is for other people more so than for
oneself. Also, rather than the notion of projects, we have projections. (Fluid
metaphor.) This means that we can work towards a rough idea of what the future
vision is, while not having to reach consensus before we do it. It means that we
state a rough purpose upfront but that we allow ourselves also to discover part
of the purpose as we go along! It is an evolutionary process-based model.

The second point is coupling. This is about being able to skills-match abased on
our own definition of what we do. It is also based on the idea that it is
helpful to carry out small projects with each other before we try big ones. So
that we an test our capacity to work with each other and that we base our team
decisions on reality. Fire and motion -- we aim, fire and then we move. We do
not try to get there with one big aim and one big shot. And this is applied to
our understanding of each other and being able to match the right people with
each other. We do not define groups. Rather groupings. This acknowledges the
fact that the notion of a hard group can be misleading. The group is actually
simply the people who have active intentions for a certain projection. This
grouping will change from day to day. Hence it is important not to think that
the whole group is active and to be deluded by large group sizes in social
networks - which often hold little meaning.

The third element is about being sensitive to the conditions- the wider context in
which we operate. For me this is about timing and sensitivity to what is
happening. 

David and I worked on it further, then also intermittently with `Matt
Cooperrider <http://www.facebook.com/people/Matt-Cooperrider/819596>`_, `tav
<http://tav.espians.com>`_ and `Mamading Ceesay
<http://evangineer.agoraworx.com/blog/entries.html>`_. There were hopes of
getting it coded but then but tav integrated some of the ideas into his bigger vision -- Espra, and we
put the Confluence Model Specification to one side.

**One sentence at a time**

A small group of us have however practiced and applied different aspects of the
model. The principles are very much alive. One example is David's idea of the
"one sentence at a time" conversation. Pure micro-messages communication. I
found it very helpful for holding difficult conversations. Tav created a `small
application <http://tav.espians.com/oneline.html?next=1>`_ in twitter to enable
the conversation to be harvested. Lesley Williams and Alexander Bustamante also
began to looked at the notion of Pioneers of Change as 'Confluence Lab'. We now
speak in terms of projections, share intentions daily and awareness of external
conditions. Each one of us has our own project

**A note on Twitter and Intentions**

It has been fascinating to see the emergence of twitter in the mainstream. A
year ago this was the kind of messaging system we were imagining whilst working
on the confluence model. It would have been where we enter out daily intentions.
The description of daily intentions are micro messages. However, instead of
status updates like on facebook, they are about what we *intend* to make happen
today. The focus is in the now.

Overall, the confluence system helps us to flock. To fly together as one. **It
helps us to stay focused on what is alive in the project** More of our time is
spent in the NOW as opposed to in the future. This means that there is less need
less to get our picture of the future exactly right.

**24weeks**

The confluence model emerged after the fallure of the `24 weeks project
<http://wiki.espians.com/24_weeks>`_ in its primary aim. The beauty of this
failure was that, just as with the 50-person conflict in Egypt, the learnings
extend far beyond the duration of the project.

**Confluence embodied in people**

What was attempted during 24weeks was very brave. In many ways it attracted
certain types of individuals that embodied a certain way of being -- I dare to
say, a more fluid one and one from which I learnt a great deal. I noticed common
patterns in this collective: less emphasis on consensus-seeking and more
flocking-like behaviour. This was particularly embodied in the individuals that
remained on the project. It made me think of the capoeira model - each
individual moves autonomously - we move as one.

.. raw:: html

  <object width="640" height="505"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/0aAbZM88MUQ&hl=en&fs=1&rel=0"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/0aAbZM88MUQ&hl=en&fs=1&rel=0" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true" width="640" height="505"></embed></object>


24 weeks had fault lines which we have analysed ad infinitum. It also had
genius. One place it did work was in this aspect: People did not ask to be told
what to do -- they did it. David Pinto helped to sustain the minimal awareness
of what others were doing. His role was to point to the obvious. He would
regularly ground the collective by doing so, drawing attention to the NOW.

David Pinto has very much helped me to understand how to apply the notion of
direct perception at a collective level. He focuses on bringing the collective
attention to the simplest aspect of what is happening now. It is at this point
that life is flowing through any project. He exposes the unnecessary mental
loops that people are going through at a collective level and also at an
individual level. He has a very minimal approach and the subtlety of his work is
often missed. Of course sometimes - like all of us -he is not aware of his own
when his own lens is slightly murky but this is yet another interesting point:
he recently declared that he is determined not to reach a state of mastery
unless he does it WITH others. He is putting himself in a high state of
interdependence. At a certain level therefore, he is living the reality of
flocking.

`tav <http://tav.espians.com>`_ is also another person that embodies a very
streamlined way of doing things. I would even say his real surname should be
"streamline" :-) as he lives this principle at many levels. It has meant that
the systems he is developing tend to free people from unquestioned and
unnecessary practices. He has a huge range, a deeply multi-disciplined approach
and his larger project `Espra
<http://wiki.espians.com/24_weeks#Espra_-_an_Evolutionary_Tool>`_ is a vision of
a possible future for collaboration and the world. It is hugely ambitious and
will need people to flock around it, to enable the creativity of many people to
flow as if one mind and one social body.

 
.. raw:: html

  <br />

Decisioning: A Fluid Model for Decision Making
----------------------------------------------

I went on to develop the idea of a 'decisioning' system, linking decision making
to flows in a river - as something that is happening actually all the time. In
fact, the word **decisioning, rather than decision-making** is used --
reflecting the idea that decisions are happening by themselves all the time. In
groups, most of the time we don't really 'make' decisions - they are just the
co-existence of lots of small actions taking place. What we need to do is to be
aware of the right moment to focus people's attention. See the video below for
more.

Part 1

.. raw:: html

  <object width="640" height="505"><param name="movie" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/-Xat4MfeOnU&hl=en&fs=1"></param><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always"></param><embed src="http://www.youtube.com/v/-Xat4MfeOnU&hl=en&fs=1" type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always" allowfullscreen="true" width="640" height="505"></embed></object>

Part 2

.. raw:: html

  <object width="640" height="505"><param name="movie"
  value="http://www.youtube.com/v/3BOd2Xqmubg&hl=en&fs=1"></param><param
  name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param> <param name="allowscriptaccess"
  value="always"></param><embed
  src="http://www.youtube.com/v/3BOd2Xqmubg&hl=en&fs=1"
  type="application/x-shockwave-flash" allowscriptaccess="always"
  allowfullscreen="true" width="640" height="505"> </embed></object><br /> <br /> <br/>


**Example of Decisioning**

An example of where I have recently experienced this again was when I attended
the `Manifesto for Female Social Innovators
<http://ogunte.com/innovation/events/203-manifesto-for-female-social-innovators>`_,
organised by Servane Mouazan of `Ogunte <http://www.ogunte.com>`_. During the
event I was expecting Servane to have set up a process by which we would arrive
at a manifesto in the more traditional sense of a 'Manifesto'. What actually happened
was that people expressed the things that were committed to doing. This is
what Servane had meant by a manifesto.

It clicked -- it was another example of **decisioning**. Rather than the group
explicitly agreeing on something consensus-based, many different action impluses
were expressed in an open manner to all. If each action impulse is a vector (an
arrow indicating movement and direction) then you have a situation where the
group has self-organised the direction of the flow of energy into specific
channels.

The manifesto is a decision -- by means of the granular intention to act. The
shape of the manifesto is the shape of the collective action that ensues from
this intention.

The beauty of this is that the decision is then absolutely the same as what we
say it is. Description stays close to reality. Very important!

Traditionally when the group 'decides' to do something in the normal sense, it
can be the case that the decision is not made democratically and therefore the
channels of flow that are set up are imaginary. Some individuals may have no
real intention of complying. In that case there is no real decision. What will
happen is very distant from what is claimed will happen. If however, the action
is defined at this granular level, then the collective action that ensues will
itself define the decision that is being made. The collective does not stay in a
state of blindness. The collective is not guided by a false decision.

**How decisioning happened**

*  Servane set a tone: "No more talk about the glass cieling. Let us just get on
   with it". She also had put her 'projection' of the Manifesto up for all to see.

*  We had a decisioning cycle -- for the duration of the event. People expressed
   their positive intentions in regard to this manifesto. 

**Thus the shape of the decision was revealed**

What Servane demonstrated was facilitatory leadership. She expressed the siren
call -- "Contribute to the manifesto for female social entrepreneurs!" And then
she facilitated the natural impulses that arose out of that siren call,
encouraging them to be expressed; capturing them and displaying them for all to
see. Thus she was maximising openness, accountability -- to self and others.

**Witnessing and allowing**

Another way to look at it is as though the group stands back and notices where
its action impulses lie as one collective -- the shape and pattern of action
right before its eyes, and exclaims "oh THAT is what we are going to do". It
witnesses and encourages life within it rather than artificially states what
will happen.

It is effortless and does not fight reality. It works with it. 

.. raw:: html

  <br /> <br /> <br />

Signalling Changing Energetic State to Each Other Using K
---------------------------------------------------------

.. raw:: html

  <div style="float:right;margin-left:10px;margin-bottom:10px;"> <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/pagedooley/2694961877" title="photo
  sharing"> <img src="http://farm1.static.flickr.com/3019/2694961877_4708aeeda1_m.jpg" alt="" style="border:solid 2px #FFFFFF;" /> </a><br /><span
  style="font-size:.9em;margin-top:0;"> <a
  href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/pagedooley/2694961877/"> </a> by <a
  href="http://www.flickr.com/people/pagedooley/"> kevin dooley </a> </span> </div>

In order for people to flow better together we need to see the feedback and feedforward loops between individual and group behaviour.

What occurred to me was the idea of **K as a signalling mechanism** 

K would be a number, something between 0 and 10 to indicate 'how you are'. It is used to
signal a state of being; an energetic state.

One of the problems we have is that people are not always great at articulating their state of
being. Some are better than others and it has very real consequences. 

I have found that it is not that people don't want to - it is just that they are
simply not used to it and can find it uncomfortable. So to be able to signal their

.. raw:: html

  <div style="float:left;margin-right:10px;margin-bottom:10px;"> <a
  href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimmydavao/2965024699/" title="photo
  sharing"><img
  src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3284/2965024699_9f9e9e2af3_m.jpg"
  alt=""style="border:solid 0px #000000;" /></a><span style="font-size:.9em;margin-top:0;"><br /> <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimmydavao/2965024699/"></a>by <a href="http://www.flickr.com/people/jimmydavao/">jimpg2</a><br /></span> </div>

energetic state without having to go into a lot of verbal detail about emotions,
could mean that you can get a rough sense of where everyone is in terms of their
energy. In actual practice, somehow the use of a number seems to serve as a
trigger for people to be able to then say more. It takes the pressure off and
allows people to expand a little further after stating a number.

**Why would you want to know how people are?**

This is practical useful information when working closely with other people. It
can be vital. I describe how it can be used to understand the overall energetic
state of a group, in the videos above. A simple signal when there is little time
for anything else can increase the awareness of the group as to its overall
state by a critical amount. It can capture weak signals that need attention long
before they become dangerous to the existence of the group or viability of the
mission.

Of course, a group has different properties to those of the individual entities
(people). So we cannot say that the group is an exact sum of all the
individuals. But to know what the individual states are can be very useful and
should be somehow taken into account and integrated into our awareness.

Direct perception and signalling of energetic states during the evolution
lounge- collective presencing exercise means that the group is tuned in to
itself and can more accurately pinpoint where and how to intervene in each
person's case. The beauty of the collective presencing experience in Evolution
Lounge is that the collective can now realistically be coach-facilitator.

K facilitates Decisioning. During a decision cycle it enables the group to be
aware of where the action impulses lie and how strong they are.


**Decisioning and GTD**

I happened to bump into two people that are working on David Allen's GTD
system - except at a group level. They were very interested in this topic and
realised that an aspect of the Confluence level was missing for them. They were
looking at stymergistic behaviour. When I described the micro message - the
daily intention, they realised that it was going a level beyond stymergistic
behaviour- since it was not just about externalising the current STATE. It was
about externalising the inner MOVEMENT. I.e. these micro messages are actually
micro VECTORS. K describes the virility of the vector.

**Decisioning and Twitter**

Twitter is the technological reason why this micro-messaging and signalling is
now a realistic possibility. And this is why the chance to confluence is now
more available. 


**Challenges**

I think that the biggest challenge is still the one of direct perception. Which
is why I am working on tools to enable each other to achieve it. It involves
going past the blind spot, at both the individual and group level. And it means
understanding reality as a rather fuzzy thing in the mind. Fuzzy is not the same
as confused. Fuzzy, as I use the term, involves being energetically calm.
Confused means being energetically stressed.


**Conclusion**

As a conclusion, the Co-Flow model is about a fluid model of life. It is
sometimes a soup, sometimes a rushing stream. By default we exist in this fluid
form. From time to time sold structures emerge. A phase change happens.
Structures are born and something quite tangible appears. If the system is
healthy then when the structure no longer serves its purpose, it will die.
Perhaps the next version of the structure will replace the first one.

Projections will sometimes give rise to projects. Decisions and Decision-Making
are solid-structured states that are sometimes needed. Ideally they arise only
then. Decisioning is the fluid activity that is happening all along. P2P
governance should give us better models for large-scale decision-making that are
seen as legitimate on a mass scale. We need to enable individuals to have
autonomy in order for the collective to be vital. Direct perception will enable
our interventions to be more precise.



**Open Questions** 

There are many questions still and when I next have a moment I will be posting them here. 

Please do get in touch if you have interest in this topic. It is an ongoing
stream of thought and practice in our work and would be excellent to share
learning and practice with you.