========================================
The Courage Files: Today is for Quitters
========================================

:X-Created: [2009-04-15, 03:00]


.. raw:: html

  <br />
  <div style="float:right;margin-left:10px;margin-top:15px;margin-bottom:10px"><a
  href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/eugene/2494643/" title="Lance Armstrong"><img
  src="http://farm1.static.flickr.com/1/2494643_afa643f7d3.jpg?v=0" alt=""
  style="border:solid 0px #000000;" /></a><br/><span style="font-size:.9em;margin-top:0;float:right"><a
  href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/eugene/2494643/">Lance Armstrong cornering</a></span> </div>

This is an article that I wrote a year ago but I remembered again. May you enjoy
it!

---

We all know the bursting sensation of a new commitment; often euphoric,
adrenelin-filled and fueled with the images of the new life, new us, new created
world in that “future reality” that somehow we connect with at the time the
commitment is born. The buzz that accompanies these instances can be addictive.

And we all know what it is like to break that commitment. Unless an ‘act of God’
occurs and we can, without a shadow of a doubt know that we cannot be held
responsible, what usually happens is what i would label as ’some kind of
fuzziness’.

I’m also not referring to a moment of revelation where you realize that the
committment you made was inappropriate in some way and you have the sense or
humility to pull out on time.

What i am writing about is the hundreds or thousands of grey-tone moments where
you simply quit and then regardless of what you tell yourself, deep down you
know the deal.


.. more


In reading the book by Lance Armstrong, this is a strong theme. A man who builds
an identity on not quitting. This theme reads through the book like a iron grip
of conviction at the most critical points on his races, he proves to himself
again and again, and to the people that he has to, that he is no quitter.

Right now in my own life, if some of the intentions i have set for the next few
months are going to come together, if i am ever going to take certain ideas
forward in a way that i believe i could, i am going to need to know a little
more strongly that i am not a quitter. My wish is to develop a practice to rise
at 4am, to meditate in this magical part of the day, and to start the day filled
with the kind of thoughts and energy that I most want to cultivate. But so far I
have not managed to do it with any kind of consistency.

One of the methods that Lance Armstrong uses at the most difficult moments is to
do something that, if he carries it to completion will give him the faith to
“know he is still in the race”.. and in this case the race against cancer. His
action is simply to move.

.. epigraph::

  If I can move, I am not sick

And, regardless of the situation each time he gives his everything to move. As a
feeble cancer patient he refused a wheelchair one time and took an hour to walk
to know for himself that he was not sick. When he is in remission he gets on his
bike and moves. At the hospital he walked around, often against the advice of
the nurses and doctors. It is one of HIS ways of building the psychological
strength so he can ’stay in the race’

I decided to do something a little less arduous than the 4am rise, to give me
the conviction in myself that I am seeking to build. To know that i am still in
the race. If i achieve this lesser challenge, I may be ready to commit to the
4am rise. That’s why I made the 30days inspiration-burst commitment two days
ago, and so far so good. Each day - write one inspiring thing.

Yet writing today was a challenge. I didn’t manage to get up early and i don’t
mean 4 am i mean even 8am slipped by. I was out dancing last night and when a
couple of challenging things happened, I found myself at the end of the day,
devoid of inspiration.

But somehow by showing up to this page, just appearing in front of it, staring
at this blank canvass, just on day 2, the day of failing to rise early, I feel
already a rise in confidence. I have known will-power as a young child, and
after a long 20-year period of learning the difference between soul-infused will
and ego-based will, I am currently working very strongly with this theme. I
realise that discipline and will go together. I realise how important small
psychological wins can be for people who are in tough circumstances, to build
their will and thereby find their inner discipline.

I assume that it is different for each person. When our psychology is
threatening to fail you, what are the small-low hanging fruits that you can do
that build up the muscle of conviction in your life? What are the practices that
energise, by giving yourself a fast reminder of who you are and what you are
capable of?

I am left thinking of Lance Armstrong. He discovered that to be a fast cyclist
didn’t necessarily imply winning the race. He learnt that winning a race needed
more than speed or force alone. It needed a level of mastery in his field. It is
this hard-earned understanding that led him to not only beat cancer but to rise
afterwards as a better cyclist than before. Only 16 months after being diagnosed
cancer-free he rose to win the Tour de France, in the fastest ever time.

What heartens me, is the tough character building that was needed for him to get
there. He does not pretend it has been a fairy tale. He tells it like it is.
Through his story, we can re-experience the raw beauty of being faced with
choices - in the very dirt-reality-deciding moments. He is a reminder of the
anti-dote to cynicism: to believe. But we are not stupid. So to give ourselves
small quick wins in terms of proof to ourselves is I think dignifying as we are
giving ourselves reason to believe. The faith in our capacity is then not blind.
We can experience that ultimate immuniser against tough moments in
life-Unshakeable conviction. And not in others or luck but in our own self to
stay in the race, whichever that race is for us.



.. raw:: html

  <style type="text/css">
    .epigraph { margin-left
      margin: 22px 40px;
      margin-top: 40px;
      margin-bottom: 40px;
      color:#575757;
      padding: 0 50px;
      background: transparent url("http://tav.github.com/static/gfx/blockquote.gif") no-repeat 0 0;
    }
  </style>

